JavaScript tracing docs refactor (#12769)
getsentry/sentry-docs: docs/platforms/javascript/common/tracing/instrumentation/index.mdx

---
title: Instrumentation
description: "Learn how to configure spans to capture performance data on any action in your app."
sidebar_order: 30
---

<Alert>

To capture transactions and spans customized to your organization's needs, you must first <PlatformLink to="/tracing/">set up tracing.</PlatformLink>

</Alert>

To add custom performance data to your application, you need to add custom instrumentation in the form of spans. Spans are a way to measure the time it takes for a specific action to occur. For example, you can create a span to measure the time it takes for a function to execute.

To get started, import the SDK.

<PlatformContent includePath="enriching-events/import" />

There are three key functions for creating spans:

> - [startSpan](#starting-an-active-span-startspan): Creates a new span that is active, and which is automatically ended. You'll likely want to use this function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [startSpan](#starting-an-active-span-startspan): Creates a new span that is active, and which will end automatically. You'll likely want to use this function.
```

- [startSpanManual](#starting-an-active-span-with-manual-end-startspanmanual): Creates a new span that is active, which has to be ended manually.
- [startInactiveSpan](#starting-inactive-spans-startinactivespan): Creates a new span that is inactive, which has to be ended manually.

## Active vs. Inactive Spans

When a new span is started, it will automatically be started as a child of the currently active span, if there is one. This means that if a span is started as an **active span**, any spans that are created inside of the callback where the span is active will be children of that span. Additionally, errors will be tied to the currently active span, if there is one.

In contrast, **inactive spans** will never have children automatically associated with them. This is useful if you do not care about capturing child activity.

A key constraint for active spans is that they can only be made active inside of a callback. This constraint exists because otherwise it becomes impossible to associate spans with the correct parent span when working with asynchronous code.

> In places where you are not able to wrap executing code in a callback (e.g. when working with hooks or similar) you have to work with inactive spans, and can combine this with [withActiveSpan](#withactivespan) to manually associate child spans with the correct parent span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In places where you are not able to execute your code in a callback (for example, when working with hooks or similar) you have to work with inactive spans, and can combine this with [withActiveSpan](#withactivespan) to manually associate child spans with the correct parent span.
```

<PlatformCategorySection supported={['browser']}>

## Span Hierarchy in the Browser

> In browser environments, spans are by default collected in a flat hierarchy where every span is the direct child of the root span. You can opt into a more fine-grained hierarchy but there are trade-offs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In browser environments, spans are by default collected in a flat hierarchy where every span is the direct child of the root span (the initial operation that kicks off the entire trace.). You can opt into a more fine-grained hierarchy but there are trade-offs.
```

Would've loved to link to an explanation of root spans here, something we should add in our glossary in the future.

Author: I added some clarity in the docs but i agree!

| `op`               | `string`                    | The operation of the span.                                                                                             |
| `startTime`        | `number`                    | The start time of the span.                                                                                            |
| `attributes`       | `Record<string, Primitive>` | Attributes to attach to the span.                                                                                      |
| `parentSpan`       | `Span`                      | If set, make the span a child of the specified span. Otherwise, the span will be a child of the currently active span. |
| `onlyIfParent`     | `boolean`                   | If true, ignore the span if there is no active parent span.                                                            |
| `forceTransaction` | `boolean`                   | If true, ensure this span shows up as transaction in the Sentry UI.                                                    |

Only `name` is required, all other options are optional.

## Starting an Active Span (`startSpan`)

> For most scenarios, we recommend to start active spans with `Sentry.startSpan()`. This will start a new span that is active in the provided callback, and will automatically end the span when the callback is done. The callback can be synchronous, or asynchronous (a promise). In the case of an asynchronous callback, the span will be ended when the promise is resolved or rejected. If the provided callback errors or rejects, the span will be marked as failed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For most scenarios, we recommend to start active spans with `Sentry.startSpan()`. This will start a new span that is active in the provided callback, and will automatically end the span when the callback is done. The callback can be synchronous or asynchronous (a promise). In the case of an asynchronous callback, the span will be ended when the promise is resolved or rejected. If the provided callback errors or rejects, the span will be marked as failed.
```

<PlatformContent includePath="performance/start-span-manual" />

## Starting Inactive Spans (`startInactiveSpan`)

To add spans that aren't active, you can create independent spans. This is useful when you have work that is grouped together under a single parent span, but is independent from the currently active span. However, in most cases you'll want to create and use the [startSpan](#starting-an-active-span-startspan) API from above.

<PlatformContent includePath="performance/start-inactive-span" />

## Starting Spans as Children of a Specific Span

By default, any span that is started will be the child of the currently active span. If you want to have a different behavior, you can force spans to be the children of a specific span with the `parentSpan` option:

```js
const parentSpan = Sentry.startInactiveSpan({ name: "Parent Span" });
const childSpan = Sentry.startInactiveSpan({ name: "Child Span", parentSpan });

childSpan.end();
parentSpan.end();
```

This option is also available for `startSpan` and `startSpanManual`.

> ## Utilities to work with Spans

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Utilities To Work With Spans
```

You can capture span attributes along with your spans. Span attributes can be of type `string`, `number` or `boolean`, as well as (non-mixed) arrays of these types. You can specify attributes when starting a span:

```javascript
Sentry.startSpan(
  {
    attributes: {
      attr1: "value1",
      attr2: 42,
      attr3: true,
    },
  },
  () => {
    // Do something
  }
);
```

Or you can also add attributes to an existing span:

```javascript
const span = Sentry.getActiveSpan();
if (span) {
  span.setAttribute("attr1", "value1");
  // Or set multiple attributes at once:
  span.setAttributes({
    attr2: 42,
    attr3: true,
  });
}
```

### Adding attributes to all spans

To add an attribute to all spans, use the `beforeSendTransaction` callback:

```javascript
Sentry.init({
  // dsn, ...
  beforeSendTransaction(event) {

    // set the attribute on the root span
    event.contexts.trace.data = {
      ...event.contexts.trace.data,
      myAttribute: "myValue",
    }

    // and on all child spans
    event.spans.forEach(span => {
      span.data = {
        ...span.data,
        myAttribute: "myValue",
      }
    });
  }
});
```

### Adding Span Operations ("op")

> Spans can have an operation associated with them, which help activate Sentry identify additional context about the span. For example database related spans have the `db` span operation associated with them. The Sentry product offers additional controls, visualizations and filters for spans with known operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spans can have an operation associated with them, which help Sentry identify additional context about the span. For example, database related spans have the `db` span operation associated with them. The Sentry product offers additional controls, visualizations, and filters for spans with known operations.
```

> Sentry maintains a [list of well known span operations](https://develop.sentry.dev/sdk/performance/span-operations/#list-of-operations) and it is recommended that you use one of those operations if it is applicable to your span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sentry maintains a [list of well-known span operations](https://develop.sentry.dev/sdk/performance/span-operations/#list-of-operations) and it is recommended that you use one of those operations if it is applicable to your span.
```
